
1. Artif Intell Med. 2018 Jan;84:127-138. doi: 10.1016/j.artmed.2017.12.002. Epub
2017 Dec 11.

Spatiotemporal Bayesian networks for malaria prediction.

Haddawy P(1), Hasan AHMI(2), Kasantikul R(2), Lawpoolsri S(3), Sa-Angchai P(3),
Kaewkungwal J(3), Singhasivanon P(3).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of ICT, Mahidol University, 999 Phuttamonthon 4 Rd, Salaya,
Nakhonpathom 73170 Thailand. Electronic address: peter.had@mahidol.ac.th.
(2)Faculty of ICT, Mahidol University, 999 Phuttamonthon 4 Rd, Salaya,
Nakhonpathom 73170 Thailand.
(3)Faculty of Tropical Medicine, Mahidol University, 420/6 Ratchawithi Rd,
Bangkok 10400 Thailand.

Targeted intervention and resource allocation are essential for effective malaria
control, particularly in remote areas, with predictive models providing important
information for decision making. While a diversity of modeling technique have
been used to create predictive models of malaria, no work has made use of
Bayesian networks. Bayes nets are attractive due to their ability to represent
uncertainty, model time lagged and nonlinear relations, and provide explanations.
This paper explores the use of Bayesian networks to model malaria, demonstrating 
the approach by creating village level models with weekly temporal resolution for
Tha Song Yang district in northern Thailand. The networks are learned using data 
on cases and environmental covariates. Three types of networks are explored:
networks for numeric prediction, networks for outbreak prediction, and networks
that incorporate spatial autocorrelation. Evaluation of the numeric prediction
network shows that the Bayes net has prediction accuracy in terms of mean
absolute error of about 1.4 cases for 1 week prediction and 1.7 cases for 6 week 
prediction. The network for outbreak prediction has an ROC AUC above 0.9 for all 
prediction horizons. Comparison of prediction accuracy of both Bayes nets against
several traditional modeling approaches shows the Bayes nets to outperform the
other models for longer time horizon prediction of high incidence transmission.
To model spread of malaria over space, we elaborate the models with links between
the village networks. This results in some very large models which would be far
too laborious to build by hand. So we represent the models as collections of
probability logic rules and automatically generate the networks. Evaluation of
the models shows that the autocorrelation links significantly improve prediction 
accuracy for some villages in regions of high incidence. We conclude that
spatiotemporal Bayesian networks are a highly promising modeling alternative for 
prediction of malaria and other vector-borne diseases.

Copyright Â© 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.artmed.2017.12.002 
PMID: 29241658  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Stud Health Technol Inform. 2016;228:773-7.

Spatiotemporal Bayesian Networks for Malaria Prediction: Case Study of Northern
Thailand.

Haddawy P(1), Kasantikul R(1), Hasan AH(1), Rattanabumrung C(1), Rungrun P(1),
Suksopee N(1), Tantiwaranpant S(1), Niruntasuk N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Information and Communication Technology, Mahidol University.

While a diversity of modeling technique have been used to create predictive
models of malaria, no work has made use of Bayesian networks. Bayes nets are
attractive due to their ability to represent uncertainty, model time lagged and
nonlinear relations, and provide explanations of inferences. This paper explores 
the use of Bayesian networks to model malaria, demonstrating the approach by
creating a village level model with weekly temporal resolution for Tha Song Yang 
district in northern Thailand. The network is learned using data on cases and
environmental covariates. The network models incidence over time as well as
evolution of the environmental variables, and captures time lagged and nonlinear 
effects. Out of sample evaluation shows the model to have high accuracy for one
and two week predictions.


PMID: 27577491  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. BMC Syst Biol. 2015 Aug 28;9:49. doi: 10.1186/s12918-015-0194-7.

A tree-like Bayesian structure learning algorithm for small-sample datasets from 
complex biological model systems.

Yin W(1)(2), Garimalla S(3), Moreno A(4), Galinski MR(5), Styczynski MP(6).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory for Biomedical Engineering of Education Ministry, Department of
Biomedical Engineering, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, P. R. China.
wwyin@mail.zju.edu.cn.
(2)School of Chemical & Biomolecular Engineering, Georgia Institute of
Technology, 311 Ferst Drive NW, Atlanta, GA, 30332-0100, USA.
wwyin@mail.zju.edu.cn.
(3)School of Biology, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA, USA.
swetha.garimalla@gatech.edu.
(4)Division of Infectious Diseases, Emory Vaccine Center, Yerkes National Primate
Research Center, Emory University School of Medicine, Emory University, Atlanta, 
GA, USA. camoren@emory.edu.
(5)Division of Infectious Diseases, Emory Vaccine Center, Yerkes National Primate
Research Center, Emory University School of Medicine, Emory University, Atlanta, 
GA, USA. Mary.Galinski@emory.edu.
(6)School of Chemical & Biomolecular Engineering, Georgia Institute of
Technology, 311 Ferst Drive NW, Atlanta, GA, 30332-0100, USA.
Mark.Styczynski@chbe.gatech.edu.

BACKGROUND: There are increasing efforts to bring high-throughput systems biology
techniques to bear on complex animal model systems, often with a goal of learning
about underlying regulatory network structures (e.g., gene regulatory networks). 
However, complex animal model systems typically have significant limitations on
cohort sizes, number of samples, and the ability to perform follow-up and
validation experiments. These constraints are particularly problematic for many
current network learning approaches, which require large numbers of samples and
may predict many more regulatory relationships than actually exist.
RESULTS: Here, we test the idea that by leveraging the accuracy and efficiency of
classifiers, we can construct high-quality networks that capture important
interactions between variables in datasets with few samples. We start from a
previously-developed tree-like Bayesian classifier and generalize its network
learning approach to allow for arbitrary depth and complexity of tree-like
networks. Using four diverse sample networks, we demonstrate that this approach
performs consistently better at low sample sizes than the Sparse Candidate
Algorithm, a representative approach for comparison because it is known to
generate Bayesian networks with high positive predictive value. We develop and
demonstrate a resampling-based approach to enable the identification of a viable 
root for the learned tree-like network, important for cases where the root of a
network is not known a priori. We also develop and demonstrate an integrated
resampling-based approach to the reduction of variable space for the learning of 
the network. Finally, we demonstrate the utility of this approach via the
analysis of a transcriptional dataset of a malaria challenge in a non-human
primate model system, Macaca mulatta, suggesting the potential to capture
indicators of the earliest stages of cellular differentiation during
leukopoiesis.
CONCLUSIONS: We demonstrate that by starting from effective and efficient
approaches for creating classifiers, we can identify interesting tree-like
network structures with significant ability to capture the relationships in the
training data. This approach represents a promising strategy for inferring
networks with high positive predictive value under the constraint of small
numbers of samples, meeting a need that will only continue to grow as more
high-throughput studies are applied to complex model systems.

DOI: 10.1186/s12918-015-0194-7 
PMCID: PMC4551520
PMID: 26310492  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

